Okay, Paul, the tape's rolling. One comment I wanted to make to you, I was going
to ask you if you'd seen the Wall Street Journal article that Peter Dubois wrote
about... I've been waiting for it, but I haven't seen it yet. Do you have any
way to get a copy of it? I think that David at Timescape is going to send me a
copy, and ultimately I'll find it in the library, I guess. If you have easy
access to the copy, I'd love to have one. Okay, well, I've got one. I'll send it
to you. In fact, I wrote him a letter the day that I read it, and he called me
at work when he got the letter, and he said that he got turned on to Dick by
your article in Rolling Stone, and he asked me specifically to say hello to you
and thank you for getting him turned on to Phil K. Dick. Isn't that great? Wow,
that's very nice to hear. He was flattered that somebody read it in Wall Street
Journal and wrote him a fan letter, and I thought it was kind of interesting
that Wall Street Journal would even have something about Phil Dickin, and I was
kind of blown away by that. He was really very nice. I talked to him quite a
while, and he said to say hi to you. Well, that's great. What's his name,
Dumris? Dubois, D-U-B-O-I-S, two words. That's my pronunciation. I don't
remember how he pronounced it. That's right. But I can send you a copy of it.
That's no problem. That's really nice. I got a phone call today from Phil's
editor and my friend David Hartwell at Timescape, and he said that Confessions
of a Crap Artist is already being reordered. There's demand for a second
printing. It's selling much, you know, even though it's a small printing, it's
selling much better than expected, and that they think the Wall Street Journal
article is playing a significant part in that. Well, good deal. I hope people
learn more about him. Okay, the interview that I constructed is a little looser
than when I generally talk to authors, so we'll just probably meander around a
little bit, so bear with me. What I'll first of all ask you is, how did you
become acquainted with Phil Dick? I met Phil at the notorious Oakland World
Science Fiction Convention in 1968 at the old Claremont Hotel. And I had been
turned on to his work really less than a year before that by some people who are
kind of well known in the comics field, Trina Robbins and Artie Spiegelman, Bob
Stewart. And I wrote about Phil's writing and particularly a book I was reading
at the time, which was The Game Players of Titan, in an underground newspaper
called Avatar. And so when I met Phil briefly at this convention, even though we
were both out of our minds because of various stimuli uh I gave him a copy of
the underground paper with a story about him and uh I guess it excited him as
well because it was some you know beginning of some kind of uh recognition other
than you know a few letters and so forth for what he was doing and at that time
I was just about to move out to California so we saw each other several times
like again partly through mutual friends, in and around 1959, the beginning of
1970. And in 1969, I had the occasion which is recorded somewhere in balance.
For a brief, bad period, I was Timothy Leary's campaign manager, when he had
just been released from the original threat of going to jail by winning a
Supreme Court victory that caused, you know, over a thousand other people to be
released within the same week. The victory was that you couldn't be made to say
that to pay the tax on marijuana because of self-incrimination. At any rate,
Larry got out of jail or out of the threat of it, decided to run for governor,
had me be his campaign manager, and we went across the country and ended up in
Montreal visiting John and Yoko where they were having their bed in for peace.
And from John Lennon's hotel room, I found out from Tim actually while we were
traveling, I'd bought UVic, which had just come out in hardcover. And Tim Leary
turned out also to be a tremendous fan of Philip Dick and Ron at this time.
Really, not very many people knew of him. except really diehard science fiction
fans. Leary had read a lot of his work, and so from Lennon's Hotel Suite in
Montreal, we called Phil, I think on Lennon's nickels, and he got the chance to
rap with Tim Leary, telling him what a great fan he was for a half an hour. So
this basically is one of the funny standout incidents, particularly for Phil of
our early connection.
It was during these years that he was still struggling along and getting all
these niggardly advances and had very low prestige, as you say, except for the
hardcore science fiction fans. Why did he keep it up during those years? Even
into the late 70s, he was struggling and not making very much money yet. What
kept him going? When I think a real commitment, first of all, to the ultimate, I
don't know if I want to say seriousness, but that's really it. A real commitment
to what he was creating and what he wanted to say, that always when he's
written, it's been because he had to write. And it was equally true that it
became the only way he could make a living. It's a classic freelance writer
situation where even though you're... Okay, if you only get $1,500 for a science
fiction novel, then what you have to do to stay alive is write $6,000 a year,
which he came pretty close to doing at one point.
He, I think, did not want to go back and start working in a record store again
or basically give up on his career as a writer, it was not until early in the
1960s that he gave up trying to become a successful mainstream writer. And even
then, he didn't give up. Although it felt like that to him at the time, he just
put it away on the back burner, having tried very, very hard for 10 years. The
first 10 years in which, while he had his first 10 or so science fiction novels
published. He wrote a mainstream novel for every science fiction novel he wrote.
So, really, he was writing two novels for one thousand dollar advance, one of
which would be published in an A-suffle novel, and the other of which would go
from publisher to publisher and just be turned down. And there are still ten or
eleven thousand unpublished novels. Any chance they'll ever get published, do
you think? I think that it's inevitable.
They'll had mixed opinions about their quality and I haven't read most of them
but it it seems clear although we may be surprised that there's nothing as
polished or as good as Confessions of the Craft Artist which I think is actually
one of his five or six best books but because of the interest in Phil's work it
seems inevitable at this point that one way or another they will most or
probably all be published within the next 10 or 20 years but probably still by
small publishers not by New York publishers
when I was making up my questions I noticed now that a lot of them have to do
with what he wrote about and I consequently wanted to ask you a question Was he
really that way? Did he really believe that? And so this is kind of the first
one of those. They may tend to get repetitive, but in all of his works, there's
a mistrust of the senses, of what the senses are telling us, a mistrust of
reality. And he seems to be saying that the truth comes in glimpses every once
in a while and that our senses can't really see it. It's kind of revealed to us.
Did he really live by that? Was that his philosophy, day-to-day life, or was
that just his writing style? Yes, that was unquestionably a part of his daily
lifestyle. I don't know if I would call that aspect of it a philosophy, although
he definitely had one, but it was a very real part of his perception. And I
spoke of the seriousness of his work. I think that a primary purpose, if not the
only one, has always been, as a Sagittarius, to pierce through the superficial
reality around us of what only appears to be real and to get at what is really
real in his view. So everything that he wrote was an attempt to do that. And in
his daily life, a
lot of issues that would come up that you or perhaps he would describe as being
at least partly indicative of a paranoid personality.
But he somehow had an incredible sense of humor. and often wisdom about it or
ability to see himself that made him on the one hand one of the craziest people
that most of his friends ever knew and on the other hand it's just great to have
as a friend
In one interview he said that you had accused him of being pre-cognitive. Were
you serious when you suggested this? That's interesting. I don't know if I ever
saw that interview. I think that was in Science Fiction Review. Uh-huh. Oh,
yeah. Yeah, I'm sure that I said something. Probably he was referring to
something in the Rolling Stone piece although I'm not sure, even though he had
lots of private conversations it's likely that that that's what it was. He
himself probably more strongly than I believe that at least in some ways that he
had incidents of being precognitive.
And I think a good fictional illustration of that is the kind of theme that he
has of a man sitting in a city and suddenly seeing himself as a very old man 30
years from now or whatever.
He still used science fiction as a way of disguising actual reality so that it
would be palatable. But he was definitely describing the horrors and humorous
fascination of a world that in almost every case is very real to him. In some
ways, he can take less of his books fairly literally.
Was he labeled a science fiction writer only because that's the only category
that seemed to fit what he wrote, or was he really truly a science fiction
writer? I guess it just depends on one's definition. Well, he was truly a
science fiction writer, and I think that the primary meaning of that is that you
belong to the club and you learn by reading science fiction. And he came up
writing stories for all the science fiction magazines and then he started
writing novels for Don Wollheim at Ace and was read only by science fiction
readers and was certainly aware of, as a fan, as a leader, all the science
-fictional plotting devices and the whole concept of the genre, the sense of,
you know, does it matter who reads science fiction? And I think that that's what
it means to be a science-fiction writer in a lot of ways is to come up from that
world and to stay within that world to whatever degree, at least with part of
your work. And he definitely did that. He wasn't necessarily satisfied with
that, and that's easy to understand. But he did, although he's not a great
reader of it after adolescence or whatever, he really loved science fiction, and
the people he wrote for and the people that he communicated with We're all
pretty much in that room. At least, yeah, I think it diversified more in the
last 10 years. But still, I would consider him very squarely a science fiction
writer. More so, say, than Bradbury. If there's any reason to make comparisons
to him, I'd consider Bradbury, in the end, a science fiction fantasy writer too.
In your conversations with him, was he ever one to bemoan the fact that science
fiction is in this ghetto and the mainstream critics don't like it and that sort
of thing? Or was he pretty much content just to write it and let other people
worry about that? He cared about those things. He always had a very kind of self
-deprecating or humble attitude towards his work, while at the same time always
giving you to know somehow that he really took it as seriously and respected it
as much as his most guarded fans. What I'm saying is that he really knew how
good it was.
But he was able to be very humble about it. Now let's see the question that you
asked again. Oh, as far as science fiction being ghettoized, did he bemoan that
fact? He bemoaned it in the sense that he felt that he and other writers in the
field that he respects deserved wider attention. and he would play on, if
somebody was concerned about ghettoization, he could give the lifelong interview
on the subject as anybody. What frustrated him, and he was very frustrated by
it, was primarily that he didn't have the freedom to write what he called
experimental mainstream novels as well. And of course, it was a tremendous
victory for him. Finally, posthumously, but he was aware of it before he died,
when the transmigration of Timothy Archer was published, in hardcover, to the
first publisher that he submitted it to after writing the novel and so forth.
Or actually, before writing the novel. So, it was something that he always
wanted to do, to write this kind of book. The ghettoization of him as a science
fiction writer kept him from him for a long time.
One of his strangest books, according to a lot of people, and I've known several
people who can't read it, is The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch. I've read
interviews where Dick said he had never taken acid before he wrote the book, and
he says that you verified this. He said he took it, and then he read the proofs.
And it scared him. Can you enlighten us on that? Is that pretty much the way it
happened? It's true that he had never taken LSD or, I think, any psychedelic
drugs before he wrote the three stigmata of Palmer Eldridge. He had had
experience with amphetamines.
and as for then taking LSD and reading the galleys that's possibly true except
that it was years before he read the galleys and maybe years before he took the
trip onto them but he was he was afraid of it before he read them he was he
always claimed anyway too scared to read the galleys when they sent them to him
and he didn't finally re-read the novel again according to what he always
claimed until a number of years later.
But I'm sure there's no question that it scared him. It scared him while he
wrote it. At one point he told an interviewer that he wrote it to kind of
exercise a terrifying vision of the man with the stigmata that he was seeing in
the sky while driving to the shack on the California coast that he was doing his
writing. And that was very real to him and terrifying while he was writing it as
well as while reading it. I think, by the way, that it's a brilliant novel. Oh
yeah, it's either number two or number three for me. I still haven't sorted it
all out, but it's been about seven years since I read it too.
I guess probably his best-known novel, Until of Late, maybe, was The Man in the
High Castle. And there he used the I Ching before that became famous. Now, it
came out in 1962. I didn't read it until 1973, but I guess that blew a lot of
people away who really hadn't heard of the I Ching and that sort of thing. And
later he apparently repudiated the I Ching. Yes. Yes, I, uh... He did, in
several interviews, and he stopped using it. Since I originally was introduced
to the itching by Phil's book and by someone else who had learned about it from
Phil's book. And still, he has the itching. I never took Phil's repudiation very
seriously, but he did have the experience that many people have that, uh... the
book. The oracle eventually told him that it wasn't useful for him to keep
asking questions of it. His feeling of what he said was that it was actually
trying to steer him in some wrong fashion. But I think that that kind of
incidental effect of the man in the high castle of introducing the Chinese He's
supposed to change it to so many people who then introduced it to the whole
culture. It's very fascinating. Yeah, I think he said he finally quit it because
it was trying to set him up.
Right. Well, he felt that way about a lot of things. I read that he liked the
scanner darkly a lot and that he considered, at the time he wrote that, he
considered it a masterpiece. And then I read that he only made about $3,500 off
of it, and that was in the late 70s. He was still getting screwed then, huh?
Well, yes, although there's some element of distortion there. I mean, it's
certainly true that the book didn't get recognized, get as just desserts. I
personally was involved in trying to find another hardcover publisher for it,
and I took it to one of the best, who was expected to be sympathetic, and they
could make Hethertale's book. And ultimately, Double Day, who those unsatisfied
with, ended up publishing it. He couldn't find another publisher. And later,
Bantam was unable to find any hardcover publisher for Valance. So this continued
right through his career until the very end when he had the satisfaction of
having The Divine Invasion and Tim and the Archer come out in hardcover. So
yeah, that was very frustrating, And the amounts of money involved up through,
well,
ballots, but particularly Scanner, were very small. However, by that time,
Phil was doing very well indeed. In fact, he had sort of started to do pretty
well, at least by his standards, during a period where he was still demonizing
to reviewers what a terrible business science fiction was. because he kept
expecting that the money that was suddenly coming in would dry up and blow away
any day now, and he'd be back to the usual poverties because he was still only
getting $2,000 or whatever for each book. But what actually started happening
was because of the quality of his work and the incredible vision that he has,
and this has happened to other American writers. Charles Bukowski is an
interesting current example. Bill was very popular and very widely respected in
other countries, particularly France, England, Japan, Germany, the Scandinavian
countries, Italy, and on and on, long before he had any kind of reputation in
the United States except as the Hugo-winning author of Man in the High Castle.
otherwise popular paperback he authored. And that popularity abroad brought him
to a point in the 1960s where suddenly he was earning
first, say, over $15,000 a year, and then pretty quickly more than that on a
consistent basis with more than half of it coming from foreign rights to his
work. And of course what had happened is he'd been a very prolific author as
well and already by this time he had, say, 20 or 25 books behind him and all the
time he'd be getting $100 or $200 for this one or that one for this year's
royalty earnings in this country and they'd be translated into 20 different
languages. and it added up to quite a good income so that if you took any one of
his books and could magically go back over its whole history you'd find out that
most of the books that he wrote ended up earning him quite a fair amount of
money over the course of his whole life and if he'd carried it on into his
estate that's certainly a lot of money by the end of the century so that a book
that may have sold for $1,500 ultimately over the years brought in $20,000 or
$30,000 or $40,000 and there's more to come. And of course the two of them now
are bringing in that movie money. So there's kind of a paradoxical situation
there. But the success that he did have in his later years financially certainly
completely came both from the quality of his work and from the incredible hard
work that he'd done for so many years while he was starving which resulted in
him having a large body of guns. Nobody wants to die at the age of 53, God
knows, but anybody would be proud to have the 50 books that Philip Deick wrote.
How do you account for his popularity in other countries, whereas he never
really caught on that much until recently here? I think that this has happened
to quite a few
very good and very original American writers that in a way a person like Phil,
his vision is so strong and really so American that it is difficult for people
to appreciate here when it's first articulated but in Europe or in Japan And
they'll read these novels and say, my god, you know, here's somebody who's
really talking about America. This really has the flavor of the real thing.
They're impressed because it cuts through cultural assumptions and all that to
really paint a very powerful picture of the place and time that the author lives
in. And that's really missing from a lot of writers who might be more popular in
their own country at their own era because their work, however good it is in
various respects, is also more palatable. It isn't as demanding in terms of,
it's like a prophet, like a biblical prophet who's simply standing up and
telling you the truth about what's really going on in this culture and in this
world and is usually stoned or ignored for telling the truth. At the distance, I
think, of Europe or Asia it was much easier to appreciate the brilliance and
humor and intense insight with which Phil Dick was telling the truth in these
novels whereas it was only for the hardcore fans here in the United States.
Okay, his last five novels or okay, let's put it this way, his last five science
fiction novels that were published, counting Transmigration as a science fiction
novel, starting with Flow My Tears, but really then more with The Scanner
Darkly, but then really the last three, Valles, Divine Invasion, and
Transmigration. That was something really different, totally different from
anything we'd seen before. Apparently he had a change of life or saw some
visions or something that really made him open this up. Do you perceive this as
something new in him, or was this just a logical conclusion of where he'd been
going to all the time? Well, it is certainly something new. I mean, he in fact
saw these three books, these last three books as a kind of a trilogy, even
though they have different settings and subjects. The thematic material is
extremely related and it comes out of his own personal experiences and one sort
of mystical experience in particular and also out of at least six years of
really intensive research into theology and philosophy and in many ways, you
know, the spiritual history of human beings at least over the last 5,000 years
or so, which he just totally immersed himself in, originally on the pretext that
he was doing research forroughs, which ultimately turned out to be true. But,
and there was a period of about three or four years where he didn't write a
novel, and we all wondered if he would again. And I'm sure he wondered. So that
this extraordinary work, particularly the last three books, definitely, as you
say, comes from a change of life, although not in the sense of going
down to the church and getting religion.
there was an awakening in him brought about as exactly as he describes in
Valleys by an incident I guess in 1975
where he's sitting in his car in a very Southern California town Santa Ana or
Fullerton around there and is kind of zapped by this pink phosphine light, and
nothing was really the same again after that, but he spent a couple of hours in
a really very subtle kind of other world, and it was only his sense of the
importance of this experience that really gives it its way. In other words,
exactly what he went through, somebody else might have shrugged off who didn't
have his particular powers of perception and interest. But he became obsessed
with the revelations that he had around and his questions about what was that
happened to him and why. And ultimately, his answers which in effect are his
answers, and in this sense it's a culmination of his entire work, his answers to
tentative or whatever, to all the questions he's been asking in all his books.
What is reality? What is history? What's really going on? And why? What is the
real nature of the forces here? And as somebody quoted Einstein as saying,
Einstein was asked if he could A reporter asked him, what would you say if you
could have the answer to any question? What question would you ask? And Einstein
immediately answered, is the universe friendly?
And that was certainly a burning question on the mind of Philip K. Dick in every
book he ever wrote. And there is a kind of extraordinary revelation in the last
two or three books in which, while still giving that incredibly penetrating,
ruthless vision of the way things really are, and often in still quite a
depressing tone, he nevertheless comes through with a very strong conviction
that, yes, we are ultimately in the hands of, or at least strongly under the
influence of a basically, the friendly creature much greater than us, that is on
our side in a battle that is a far from decided. But you could make this as
similar to the Christian myth or the myth of almost any other great world
religion. Or as different from it as you want it to. You could make a great case
that, hey, this man believed the straight party line. he could make a great case
that he was a heretic whose books should be burned you know by every organized
and disorganized religion in the world, so that there's no easy conclusion as
to, because it is so uniquely his vision as to what the meaning of the vision
and the information in his last work is. But there seems no question that he
beginning to really make some very strong statements about what he finally
thinks is going on.
He said in one of the interviews that he was an ardent Christian, quote unquote.
I'm sure he couldn't be mistaken for somebody in the moral majority, but But how
do you interpret that? What was his feelings? Was he a Christian in what sense
of the word? I think that—have you read Timothy Archer yet? Oh, yeah. Well, I
think that there's a portrait of an ardent Christian in Bishop Archer in that
novel, and that at least gives some clue as to the nature of that for Phil.
He did have an intense and in some ways kind of secret relationship with
Christianity and even the church, and particularly the Episcopal Church,
certainly during the last decade of his life. although it was as with many
things a love-hate relationship and his oldest daughter who is a devout mystic
computation is so far has felt almost afraid to read Valis because the
theological ideas are so radical, and it's upsetting to her, as it would be to
anyone in any sense whatsoever, is within that mainstream, and really, it should
be upsetting to any intelligent person, although fascinating.
So that I think that for most people, if they heard that he was or described
himself as an Archic Christian, and they would tend to misunderstand me.
The image that you get from that is not a real good representation of Phil,
although, in fact, if you really knew him, you could say that, yes, this is
exactly true. This is a man who is very, very aware of the Christ story and even
the language and what's behind it And his
concerns regarding that are pretty clear in Dallas On The Define of Vision and
Timothy Archer. But the questions,
the powerful, I think you can see in Timothy Archer also a very powerful
agnosticism. You know, a willing, an uncertainty, a need to ask questions a
doubt even at the same time of experiencing an ardent sense of faith and very
much part of still spiritual life in that sense yeah to me he was a true
agnostic I guess with a capital A because he did distrust the senses and you
can't prove it so so why is it important that aside from philosophical or
theological beliefs, that to me is agnosticism really I think that you know,
there's a profound spirituality in that kind of, as you say, agnosticism with a
capital A and that its work, I believe, would be and probably already are,
welcomed by intensely religious people of a theological bent I mean, anyone of
real faith who really is interested in the great question is going to be
delighted ultimately to discover these outrageous novels like The Divine
Invasion and The Transmigration of Timothy Archer, which really asks passionate
questions and care about the answers in that whole sphere. Okay, I'm bouncing
around among these three, so which which is understandable i hope uh that uh
that vision that he had has intrigued me a lot i read i guess the text of it in
platts interview and then before i read vallas then i read vallas and then i
read the letter that ursula le guin wrote uh to phil about uh how she was afraid
he was going off the deep end and that sort of thing and his reply kind of uh
kind of made me think well, you know, is this a fictitious device or did this
really happen? And I really got confused and hence more interested in it. I
guess it really did happen, or that's how he perceived it anyway.
It's a totally subjective experience, you know, even as he describes it, right?
It's something that happened to him that, you know, in fact, one of the issues
that comes up for him is how do you prove something like that, you know, to
yourself, as much as anyone else? but absolutely no question that it was very
real to him and that the horse lover fat character in Valet is as real a self
-portrait as you could find
I just got the new locust today, I get a second class so maybe it's the old
locust but in the books in print in the back, they list the transmigration of
Timothy Archer. I guess it's Charlie Brown that reviewed it, but he said it's
ostensibly based on Bishop Pike. But the reader will notice that it's really
Phil that's the lead character. Is that true? Is Bishop Pike really Phil? Was
that him doing all this searching? well um it is Bishop Pike I'm sorry I guess I
should say it was Bishop Archer Phil Dick Bishop Timothy Archer is unambiguously
a portrait of Bishop James Pike of the Diocese of Northern California whom Phil
knew personally now if you want to take that a step further it's perfectly
reasonable for the reviewer in Locus to say that it's obviously Phil in the
sense that one can certainly make a case that all the characters in all of those
books are himself and I think that's a meaningful thing to say it is very much
like different sides of themselves having conversations with each other, and the
conversations are very alive as they happen. In that sense, certainly the
concerns, while they reflect Bill's sense of Jim Pike, are also very much a
projection of the shame of the concerns that Pike cares about and wonders about.
So it's a reasonable statement, but I think that At the same time, that doesn't
mean it's not also
very much a portrait, a romantic left about Pike. It is possible for an author
to do both those things.
What was Bill's relationship with Pike? Were they close friends or just
acquaintances?
I don't totally know. My impression is that they were fairly close for a period.
in terms of the amount of time spent together or whatever, I doubt that there
was really a lot of it. But I think the closeness is probably very real on both
sides over several years.
Bill's wife, Nancy,
her mother is the character, I've forgotten her name, in the novel Timothy
Archer who is the bishop's mistress. So that was how Bill happened to know Jim
Pite, although he was, I think, interested, inevitably would have been
interested in given facts, concerns, interests, both theologically and the
paranormal and so forth and personality. And it was a thrill for Phil to know
the man and have a friendship and fascinating conversations with him. But it was
this connection through his wife's mother, which actually stepmother,
which ends up being, you know, in large part, the basis of the sort of inside
view given in the novel. The lead character really is not Bishop Pike, but the
protagonist is Angel. And there's an even more fascinating question. is Angel
Phil. Yes, certainly she is, and yet I like Ursula Le Guin's comments about what
a beautiful character Phil is created in Angel Archer and how much Ursula comes
to care about her. Again, I think that while it's perfectly right to say that
this character, Angel, is in many ways killed it, it's also right to say that
She's a completely creative character, who's very confident, and, you know, a
true female character, which is quite an accomplishment. And Phil felt and said
that he modeled her angel after his daughter Laura.
That was my next question. Who was she? But I was really intrigued with the
internal dialogue, her internal dialogue, Angel, when she was thinking about
herself and how she went on and on. It was almost a stream of consciousness, and
I figured there was some of him in there, but that was almost, to me, the best
part of the book. Angel clearly made the book to me. I heard other people
comment that as well. That's great. That's wonderful. He would be delighted to
hear that.
you wrote the book in a fit of passion which is the way that you always write
although I've been thinking about it for a long time
last spring the spring of 1981
in about the actual writing was in a period of time probably less than 6 weeks
less than 6 weeks I know that he said he wrote lots of words in incredibly short
amounts of times, and I didn't know if that one was one of those or not. Yeah,
almost all of his novels are, even though some of them go through two drafts.
But the actual work, including the work of writing a new draft or whatever,
tremendous amount of sort of preparation meditation you know the actual work was
in most cases done in a very short span of time as little as three weeks in some
cases and you cannot distinguish the you know gorgeously written you know
supposedly more literary novels like I don't know how to say the Yubik and the
Confessions and the ones that he had published in hardcover through Doubleday
and so forth, you can't really distinguish them by the process of writing from
the ones that were written for Ace and that in some cases appear to be more
tossed off. I think that there is a distinction, you know, that he's more
relaxed and not trying to achieve as much on some levels in a novel, I'd say,
our friend's although his heart is very much there, but I'm just saying that
interestingly, I think you'd find in most cases the actual process of writing of
typing isn't that different, probably in the case of Ayubic or a man in the high
castle or obviously Valleys or Transmigration the years of meditating on the
subject and on the problem of the novel and how are you going to write it and a
lot of questions that don't become answered until he starts writing that there
was a lot more of that process in the more work-through novels and that some of
the lighter ones are ones that while he wrote them in the same three to six
weeks, he hadn't really thought about them beforehand so they're more like
spontaneous
and maybe not as deep although then you have this experience You know, it's
books where a book like Sproul's Sade or many of the A's books, or whatever, you
know, will suddenly run incredibly deep. Whether to be a part of it or you'll
have some experience in reading it, that's extremely thoughtful. And it's harder
in that sense to devise and often set to do greater natural work.